all right we are on the record it is
6:05 PM
Tuesday June 4th 2024 we're convening uh
calling to order this third meeting of
the Anover Charter revision commission
we have in
attendance uh Karen Mador myself jod
gross Carol Lee and Patricia Billings
Jeff Maguire absent at this point of the
committee members is Adrien mandaville
and we have members of the
public um Eric Anderson the cres ah here
Adrien has joined us thank you uh
members of the public the cres Eric
Anderson
um who's hidden
again Shannon Lowden of course and um
now I'm forgetting who it is at behind
798 3815
please remind
me Leanne Hinson Leanne thank you all
right call to order take an attendance
um sorry yeah Leanne if you can mute
thank
you uh and Katherine magaldi Lewis just
joined thank you for coming uh so the
first well the second agenda item after
calling the meeting to order is public
speak so in no particular order uh
Shannon nothing at this time for now
thank you okay uh the
cres I'm here for public
listen I don't know about my wife just
here to listen want to know what's going
on thanks okay thank you Katherine
nothing thank
you Eric
nothing at this time okay so that brings
us to the main agenda item which
is
Leanne what's that Leanne Hutchinson ah
sorry lean do you have anything to say
okay I'm right now okay all right the
main agenda item which uh at this point
we're going to go through the list of
action items that we delineated last
week and get either a presentation or an
update or whatever you have basically uh
let's just see where everyone is and uh
discuss things as appropriate see where
we go next um since my item was the
first on that list what I'm going to do
here is I'm going to share the screen
like I did last
week um
I don't see what are you folks seeing
right
now nothing just a plain old regular
view
okay there we
go how about
now oh you're good you have multiple
documents up though yeah
well
so there we
go so we had well I had multiple
documents because it actually made sense
because
uh this had the list of items so the
first item on the list here the dollar
amounts to trigger Town meetings
I actually conferred quite extensively
with Eric on this which is why I invited
him to the meeting so that the guy that
knows what's behind these items can
comment on questions so basically in
section 303 the annual Town budget
meetings and special Town meetings we
have a number of conditions here a
number of monetary conditions that
trigger a special town meeting and uh it
was generally agreed upon that a lot of
these things were too small or that the
ideas that were involved were too
limiting or out of date so the changes
in here are to try to reflect uh the
numbers that are more fitting for uh for
what we see in the budget so just going
down through the the few changes that we
have here um the issuance of bonds and
all other forms of financing the terms
of which are in excess of one year
did not have any floor on it so if we
needed to issue a bond for a dollar we
needed to go to town meeting so we
introduced the concept of putting a
limit in here $50,000 or more and I'm
going to go through all of these and
then we'll go back and and talk them so
that just so that we can see all this in
context um related to that supplemental
appropriation we went from a half of a
percent to
1% and then
in E what's the number what's the number
on the
1% what's the dollar number Eric if you
could so that depends on the budget in
any one time but 805b basically states
that it is the combination of the town's
portion of the budget and the school's
budget minus Ram so if you said 1%
currently it would be 1% of around $9
million would be the cut off and half
percent is half of
that okay any other questions on that
point I'll move
on uh section e leases and or lease
options again didn't have any floor on
it so we added an excess of 50
,000 and G which I think is one that
that really makes the most sense because
of the number of items that it covers uh
the application for or participation in
any federal state or private grant
program now what this had before was a
limit on the value of the program and
what we're changing this to is that
we're looking at how much the town has
to kick in if if we have a grant that
we're applying for that doesn't require
any co-contribution by the town free
money it makes sense it it doesn't make
sense to have to go to a town meeting to
get approval of it we should just be
able to move forward in any case if I
understand this uh correctly any of
these um grants still have to go through
the board of Selectmen before we can uh
uh submit an application is that correct
Eric that is correct so I am as the
administrator I am authorized by the
board of Selectmen to submit for any
grant that does not require a town
contribution anything that requires a
town
contribution requires the board of
selectman's approval anyway okay and
again we we put a a floor on this in
excess of
$225,000 so any Grant where our portion
of it is less than2 $ 5,000 again we
wouldn't have to go to town meeting and
that's it it's those one two three four
changes
thoughts opinions
contributions so if I can make a couple
comments chair is that acceptable to you
AB absolutely that's why you're here
Eric Okay so
um the the first is under
304 uh B supplemental
Appropriations the reason why I'm
suggesting we raise that to 1% from a
half percent is really based on guidance
from our treasure because our treasure
does not like what we do at the end of
each fiscal year and at the end of each
fiscal year we take the individual line
items that are uh overexpanded and we
transfer money in from other line items
that are under
exended and the treasurer feels that
that kind of violates state law and that
what we should be doing is approving a
supplemental
appropriation for those particular line
items you know so that they're under the
cap and then let everything else flow
into unexpended fund balance which
essentially accomplishes the same thing
but that's what she thinks is the more
legally correct way to do it in the
state but the problem is is that because
we run our budgets fairly tight it's not
uncommon to have 100 or 150 individual
line items at the end of the year that
are over even though the overall budget
is going to be you know hundred or
$200,000 under and so often the total
supplemental Appropriations would exceed
a half of
1% um but they're not likely to exceed
1% um and if they do then that would
have to go to town meeting if we did
that now the treasurer still has to
convince the board of finance that that
is the way they should operate um and
that's on her to do that but that would
enable that um the second thing is when
we talk about town grants I took a quick
look um through our grant folder and you
know over the last say four years you
know we've applied for somewhere around
35 grants um and of those
grants um roughly 70% of them would fall
under the
$25,000 Town contribution
threshold um if you made that $50,000
only the top
10% which is essentially you know
roughly one Grant per year would rise to
the threshold of requiring a town
meeting so from a governance standpoint
setting that at 50,000 would be
convenient remember it still requires
Board of Selectmen approval um uh if you
set it to
25,000 you're looking somewhere around
three on the average year somewhere
three to four grants that potentially
require a town meeting um but at least
all the little stuff would not so that's
all I had to say on those items um happy
to take any questions you have or
members have
um a couple quick questions I I
guess my own take on
this is that it I would I
would really I guess I would rather see
us around 50,000 on the grant stuff um
personally seeing that you know how much
we've been doing in Grants and been
fairly successful at it you
know
um and the second thing I would say is
that um I personally would like to see a
a kick that we when we start talking
about leases that leases or purchases
that are above $100,000 that instead of
just going to town meeting it has to go
to a referendum I you know I'll be
honest I I'm extremely frustrated about
like our tractor purchase that should
have that should have went to that
should have went to the whole town the
idea that we approved it at a meeting I
just I'm extremely frustrated with
that that was a town meeting that anyone
could have gone to right well yeah
anybody could go on any of them but you
know basically you talk about a very
small contingent making a decision and
and then that was you know that's a
$240,000 decision you know we're we're
pushing a quarter of a million dollar
investment you know right to a meeting
that any Town resident could have
attended and they chose not to but Jody
it's not that people choose not to a lot
of times candidly it's that they just
can't go you have parents with kids you
know that that can't they can't just run
out at at 7 pm when they're trying to
put their kids to bed you you know I
think that's just common
sense most of those meetings are
attended by the people who really don't
want to spend money
really because that didn't seem like
that was the vote last time in fact the
problem we run into a lot of times is
you have people that pack meetings that
that you know want to spend money
so oh that's funny I like that one I
want to spend money Eric we we've wanted
to spend
money well obviously we did I mean I'm
not gonna get into thetive discussion
and rehash it here but it's a perfect
example why these things should go to a
town the bigger numbers should go to
town vot
and Eric would did I'm sorry uh or
someone here was it $9 million that's
our
Topline uh budget for the town between
the two so and the and the um and the
regular town is n million okay correct
the way section 805 reads is that it's
the total budget minus the contribution
to Ram to the regional budget is the
number you use for that half percent or
1% or in some places
0.25% uh
appropriation well then you're pushing
up against Eric's or Adrian's number of
$100,000 to go to
referendum but when you sit and think
about that if you talk about a $100,000
expense you know um you talk about the
tractor as a perfect example you know
the tractor is a you know is nearly
2third of a mill you know this isn't a
small expense for the average taxpayer
that we're
spending well we can get into all the
details related to it's it's not
appropriate or it's appropriate and
where it should go but when you're
saying you want to go to referendum
you're just adding more costs and more
issues onto the
town okay so I would ask I would go back
to Bob and Bob your numbers I don't have
a problem with your numbers then yeah
1% I'm also going to step in here say
Adrian we're not going to relitigate the
decision that was made already and just
for the sake of of of argument that
meeting was one of the best attended
ones that I've seen in a long time so
yes there's a minority of of the town
that participates but for that
particular meeting people were better
represented than than I think most items
and it was a very close vote and that's
my point imagine if you actually had
more of the town's people being able to
participate in that meeting it was a
very short notice for meeting meeting
you know and it was a and that's the
other issue I mean even if you even if
again as a parent or as a as an adult
with a a busy schedule you know trying
to take time off at the last minute to
to go to a meeting that literally is you
maybe five or six days away by the time
I get the postcard is kind of tough
sometimes so and for for context how
many uh typical referendum in town how
many partic what's percentage of
participation
there a typical one I don't know would
probably be I think our average is
probably 50 people for referendum
referendum oh no I'm I'm sorry I'm Sor
talking about budget a budget meeting
yeah sorry I don't somewhere between 140
and 300 I think probably on average
that's correct it depends on what the
mill rate is going to be so if our mill
rate is going up substantially a couple
of Mills then we do get a larger
turnout okay yeah I liked uh Bob your
your numbers I thought they were fine as
presented well they're really Eric's
numbers he's he's the guy that's in the
thick of this right he and I discussed
these and fleshed them out and kicked it
around until something made sense all
right if there's no other discussion on
this then it's going to be you know this
is these changes will eventually be in
the package of what we submit to the the
board of
Selectmen um and that that's that all
that I have to say on are so you're
making this as a
motion because if if you are then I
would make a motion to adjust the the uh
you know to add a to add a line that
over $100,000 we go to we go to a
referendum and where is that in this
section Adrian tell us where this this
it's not that's the point that's the
problem it's not in the section we don't
have a trigger for this you know
well Adrian let me play with your thing
because $100,000 you know five years
from now 100 you know we have a $9
million and you know 1% is what
$90,000 should there be something in our
town Charter that says something over 2%
or something over 3% should go to
referendum is that is that where you're
headed yeah I think that's that's
perfectly acceptable you know and
honestly I'd even find middle ground and
say we do 1.5% you
know well I'm going to suggest that it
would be inappropriate to try to come up
with wording or numbers here on the fly
on a completely new item well Bob Bob I
don't think that even your writing or
your changes or the end all be all I
think what you're doing is you're trying
to come up with things to sit there and
address and get into the draft report
so you know
you can put forth a motion we can put
forth a motion on
your potential changes to the tra the
the the charter and then the draft has
to be presented to us down the road we
all have to approve that draft from the
attorney or from whoever is gonna write
it I recommend the attorney
um exactly Adrian and if Adrien wants to
make a motion to put something in the
charter for a referendum vote at I agree
with Jody 2% of the total budget then
something else we would vote on if we
did one and a half that would be you
know one it'd be
135,000 which which basically is a third
of a mill anything over a third of a
mill
so yeah maybe we should keep them as two
separate items though I mean if you're
you know prove what Bob and Bob did and
then there's another item that I think
we're we're trying to add to the list
which reasonable I think Adrian's
bringing up a good point um it's just a
question of what's the right number to
say boy this is a this is substantial to
go to referendum I don't think any of
the numbers you listed Bob hit that
threshold right so Adrian is talking
about a number that would require going
to referendum that's not what we're
talking about here under special Town
meetings that's a separate section it's
really a separate subject and that's why
it what I was going to say Jeff when you
stepped in was Adrien you feel strongly
about this I want I want to suggest that
we not deal with that particular item
right now I want Adrien to go away
figure out where it fits in in the
charter write his draft and then we we
discuss that at at the next meeting okay
that's fine I guess my point is this is
about triggers for spending that's
really that's really what we're
addressing it wasn't about necessarily
does it fit in this particular line it's
about triggers for Town meetings
referendums spending spending within the
charter and how and how we address that
okay I want to take a step back from
this because there's something else that
I was thinking along these lines here we
are at the third meeting we have a hard
limit date in which to complete the
changes and submit the first draft to
the board of Selectmen and we already
have a significant list of items that we
agreed to tackle the first meeting
deliberately included a public hearing
and the public was free to contribute
their thoughts suggestions
recommendations this process cannot be
open-ended okay we can't continue to
accept further submissions for
additional changes just as they you know
we have to draw a line somewhere well I
agree I agree with you but when this was
originally discussed and and this was
something that Eric you know talked
about you know this is something that
was brought up as triggers for
referendums and voting you know so I did
not I do not feel that this is something
separate if you're talking about you
want it separate now because you want go
to it because you're saying well it's a
different section of the charter then
that's fine but the point is it all fell
under the same it fall under the same
umbrella this wasn't this this wasn't
something me trying to be open-ended
this is trying to me address something
that I thought we were already on the
path to address so it really does fall
under the same umbrella because if we
are increasing the amounts for the
issuance of bonds increasing
supplemental Appropriations to 1% of the
budget putting a threshold in to uh push
something to
referendum is
just I think that that would be
appropriate too because that way it
gives the voters taxpayers in
town certain amount of time to obtain an
absentee ballot and plus the hours of
6:00 AM to 8:00 pm voted a referendum
all right Jeff you are more familiar
with the order of these things than I I
uh I defer to your suggestion or
recommendation as to how to proceed at
this
point um I would recommend making a
motion that outlines the changes you
want to make and then someone will
second it we'll have further discussion
and then we'll vote so if you just
review the changes that you were you
would
discussed and then I would sit there and
I would go back you already asked Adrian
to come up with this the area that he
believes that the referendum issue 100
thou the 2% or one and a half percent
whatever that number is um we address
that next week so I because I don't
anything you have just as a point of
order does that that charge to to Adrian
also require a motion and and and a vote
or can that just be the way no no just
put it as an agenda item on next week
that you know that I'll put forward
something and we vote on it and that's
that all right so simp one enough who
wants to make a motion then I'll put
forward a motion
to um add the four recommended changes
outlined by Bob uh with um input from
Eric can you list them
sure uh uh adding uh issuance of bonds
and all other forms of financing
exceeding $50,000 in
value um changing any supplemental
appropriation uh which exceeds
1% It was Prior previously
0.5% uh and changing any lease lease
options adding a caveat in excess of 50
,000 uh to which the
town uh including the board is a party
too uh and then uh the
application for or participation in any
federal state or private grant program
uh striking the in excess of
$2500 um
and um um shall require Andor local town
of of Education to contribute in excess
of $25,000 in kind in in section
g I'll second his
motion any additional discussion yes I'd
like to make a amending
motion I would change the 20 in excess
of $25,000 in
participation enter to such Grant
programs to $50,000 and and I'll quickly
explain why I feel that there are
multiple situations where we may have
leftover money in a budget or we may
have um money in a contingency that that
we can use we have an opportunity to get
into a program $50,000 I think and
you'll notice that I'm I try to be open
on these things although I'm a fiscal
conservative and I want us to you know
be more aware of how we spend our
dollars and let everybody participate in
this particular case I'll say that
$50,000 I think Falls within the purview
you know of a of a a board of selectman
and a board of finance and and
especially now because we're getting so
much better now at getting grants and
we're using them much more often as
everyone has noticed there's a bunch of
things going on in town I think $50,000
gives us a little more room and and
allows us to participate more so that
would be my motion $50,000
amended I'll second
that okay any additional discussion
all in
favor I I I I
opposed okay it's
unanimous all
right so we'll move on to the next items
early voting and dates of
Elections that Karen and
Patty took on um I'm going to stop
sharing my screen here
and Karen do you need to
share um uh no but I can always uh send
this uh to you guys afterwards I just I
wrote everything
up
um can I interrupt real quick um Bob I
uh Karen's obviously gonna send this to
you I sent something to everyone on the
committee um regarding the report from
uh from that Hein actually did I think
it would be be beneficial if we can take
all the things that are being presented
at the meeting um and put them in a
packet to then get attached to this
particular meeting so that the public
has the same thing we have that's all Mr
secretary if that's a choice I'm gonna
say
no public can attend the meeting the
public can
view YouTube
um and I'm a volunteer well as a as a
matter of policy I mean simply we just
have to whatever what I've sent you what
Karen's gonna send you you simply would
need to forward those over I believe
Carol am I correct that it's done now by
Kate she'll actually put the packet up
for you um with the meeting yes she it
just has to get sent to her so literally
all you'd have to do is put it in a
single email Jody do you think that you
could do that um I would request that
the commit send it directly there um
just like Bob sent it out to all of us
and if it if we could add Kate to that
distribution that would be better that's
perfectly fine I'll I'll gladly resend
mine to Kate but I I do think it's
important that this stuff is out there
for the public that's
all and actually I believe it's
actually believe it's actually required
so we need to make available to the
public anything that we have at a
meeting period if we have a pack and we
are it's on YouTube no that doesn't cut
it Jody I'm sorry honestly well I'd have
to say also any outside of a a formal
meeting any communication that car that
that exceeds four of us constitutes a
quorum at that point so it has to be
shared all right so I'm just going to
need an email address to share it um
Karen did you get the did you get the
email from me uh I believe I did okay so
if you're going to share it with all of
us you would simply do that and then
Carol can you just send her a quick
email with
Kate's yes I will thank you and Bob's
then too
right what's that those modifications
you made those yeah anything that's
presented tonight we all need to just
add Kate to it and then in the future
make sure she's on the distribution list
as you noted Jody
yep okay Karen
okay um as far as the early voting um
after research with and discussion with
the register of voter uh we feel that it
would be best to address early voting by
adding the following section so adding
section 210 for early voting uh the
dates and hours for early voting shall
be conducted as prescribed by the
Connecticut General
statutes uh the reason that we feel it
should be left open and identified only
as prescribed by State statutes so it
eliminates the need for the TR revision
if the number of days or hours that
early voting polls are to be open were
changed or if the early voting was
changed to include
referendums
exactly that's that's
basically I'm sorry Karen will you
sharing
screen no I'm not oh okay I don't know
how to do that so
don't worry that that
was that was fine I mean I think we
shouldn't go into significant detail
related to early
voting right no it was succinct and
basically said whatever the state does
we follow perfect exactly I would I
would make a motion then that we accept
Karen's submission as um you know as our
next line item to go to the uh to go
towards the report I'll second that
any additional
discussion all in favor I I I any
opposed motion passes
unanimously thank you
Karen all right um the next item
here did the early voting cover the
dates of the elections also
they did not yes no but that was your
assignment though hearing
P
that um as far as section
203 uh we want to change to reflect the
change from May to November Municipal
elections uh which this would affect 203
a b c and d so as follow
um a on and after January 1st 2024 at
the biannual municipal election to be
held on Tuesday after the first Monday
of November of the odd number years
pursuant to section 1012 of this Charter
and then the rest remain the same uh B
at at the biannual election to be held
on Tuesday after the first Monday of
November 2023 and every four four years
thereafter and that's only if U the
clerk remains
elected uh C at the biannual Town
election to be held on Tuesday after the
first Monday of November 2023 there
shall be elected members uh the rest
will remain the
same um items C1 through six would
remain the
same um and D all terms of office except
as otherwise provided in this Charter
shall commence on the 2 Tuesday
following the November election and then
the rest remain the same
so you know like I said I'll submit
this I apologize Bob um was the was that
do we have a separate line in that list
for adjusting the
um adjusting to a line with
ram that was separate I had that okay
I'm sorry thank you that's okay
did I'm sorry did someone um make a
motion
to accept Karen's proposal I'll make a
motion all right I'll second
Carol any further discussion on this
seems comprehensive
moving to November is appropriate yeah
okay all in favor I I any
opposed no motion carries
unanimously okay the next item there
then is referendum voting align the
Board of Ed and the budget timing with
Hebron and that's
Carol so after
doing some research the only way
to align so that we're able to comply
with the state statute which is Ram
referendum is the Tuesday following the
first Monday in may we would have to
move budget
process uh right now the way that Hein
rewrote their Charter in order to do is
that the board of Finance
not later than the third Tuesday in
April holds a public hearing on the
butt right after immediately after that
well Board of Finance within a week
they submit their they present their
budget as they found after what they
heard at the public
hearing and then it just goes
automatically to referend so it would
eliminate our annual Town
budget there would be no way that we
would be able to have an annual Town
budget meeting because unless we were
just to have the T the town budget
meeting receive input like the board of
Finance
does and then automatically vote a
referendum not take any votes as to
whether or not to send it like we Curr
we still have an annual Town budget
meeting but we would have to bump for to
finance up to their public hearing the
beginning of April have our annual Town
budget meeting middle of April and then
if people make motions there at the
annual Town budget meeting to eliminate
something in the budget it would just
automatically then go
on
that but that is the only way that we'll
be and
line
and I don't disagree with the timing but
the question that I've always had in
these meetings is uh we we're still in
we're still considering we have to have
the budget meeting and the budget
hearing can those two be combined
can we work a way out to combine those
two so what are you saying like combine
the annual Tom budget meeting with the
board of Finance public hearing
yeah and then
just and do that I was just saying if we
still wanted to keep them separate or
just totally
eliminate P that the
to well why couldn't that budget meeting
meting town meeting hearing be a
full-fledged which it is it's a board of
Finance meeting and why couldn't they
um make adjustments on the Fly and get
it approved I mean because that's what's
going to referendum right they could
that's how Hein does it they hold a
public hearing uh the board of Finance
receives the input they then if they
feel the public input is appropriate
they agree with it whatever they make
their adjustments and then submit that
budget
referendum Jeff what you were suggesting
is actually like item nine of the things
that we were covering merging the board
of Finance public hearing and the town
meeting aren't those one and the same
what you were just yeah okay
I mean I I would like to see that I mean
the only the only concern I have Carol
is people making changes and then what
occurs with those changes and how do
they get rolled into the budget
um you know what is the mechanism for us
to do it effectively and efficiently so
that it just gets processed right well
that's why it's with the board of in he
need just have the board Finance the
public
hearing and then that budget gets
[Music]
referend okay so they take input from
the public but the public can't make any
motions or reduce
it so they
can't so in Hein they
can't say that again just explain it in
a very basic way what happens in the
Hein process okay so the board of
Finance holds their public
hearing uh not later than the third
Tuesday in
April they receive public input and
within one week after that public
hearing the board of Finance shall
present a budget or vote by the annual
budget
referendum and that was really so just
just a sto there for one second so in
our process uh at the Town budget
meeting individuals from the public can
make a motion to decrease our
budget right before it goes to
referendum so in he they're eliminating
that
correct
okay but
at the
hearing the board of Finance can take
public input and if necessary make
adjustments immediately right then and
there correct but it's just before it
gets right so seven elected officials
will make the decision whether or not to
produce something that you know maybe
members of public seem to G wrly on or
they could just send their initial
proposed budget directly to record
okay I mean I like that I just don't
know
if
um I like that I think that's a cleaner
way to process it and move it on and and
I like the timing
because you know the way we've done it
for years is that there's a town
meeting a a budget referendum for Ram
and then a budget referendum for the
town so we have multiple events all
coming within a three week four week
time span
um I I I I like that I I don't know what
everybody else thinks about it
but I think that would be more efficient
way of doing business and Eric if you're
still on does that timeline
sound unreasonable to you it you know I
just i' guess I'd ask you that because
you deal with Bo of
Finance So based on that I started
working backwards and saying okay how
could you make that work so if you set
the townwide budget referendum is the
same day of ram
referendum um Carol I believe that's
usually what around May 6 somewhere in
there
you you're saying for for what for
Ram Tuesday following the first Monday
in May so it varies um this year it was
the seventh right
yes where it's been like the third of so
it's G to be somewhere
between essentially the earliest it
could be was be May 2nd and then the
late latest it could be
theoretically would be May 7th or 8th
actually seven
seven okay so you would have to back
that up the townwide budget meeting to
somewhere between April 15 and April
20th um and then you could keep the
language it says the referendum is then
on the second following Tuesday aligned
with the regional board of educ
um but we would have to eliminate the
wording that says if the budget is
defeated at the annual Town budget
meeting then we would go back to another
annual Town budget meeting the same day
of the following week
so I believe that was why it just goes
straight from Finance public
hearing to the
referend so you would you would
basically if we kept as much of our
current system as we could you would be
rolling the dice and saying okay
assuming that the budget at the first
budget meeting gets approved to
referendum it would coincide with the
ram referendum if it does not get
accepted if the the budget gets rejected
then it would not coincide with it okay
the only other option would be is that
the annual Town budget meeting accept
motions from the floor someone votes to
eliminate budget line get a second and
that passes great but not take a vote at
the end as to whether or not to send the
adjusted budget or the proposed budget
from court of Finance referendum all we
would do is take motions from the this
would still give the taxpayers the W
eliminate a budget line if they would
like but it automatically would go to
referendum but that would mean we would
have to bump the board's Finance up the
beginning of April for their public here
and then we would have to follow the
board of finance and maybe that
following so if they have the first
Wednesday in April we would have the
second Wednesday ail and then it would
automatic you know that town
meeting let the adjustments be made by
the people then automatically go to
refer not allow
a I I very much like that idea because I
think in order to get support for this
we still need to leave in place the
ability for them to make a reduction I
agree
so you know as long as that's not
putting too much pressure on the board
of Finance right now as it is Eric
you're asking us for our budgets every
Department in December that we have it
to you by the beginning of January so
you know that's giving time
to have the board of Selectmen just
review it and then forward on to the
board of
Finance for them to have their
workshop right in in in my world the
ultimate thing would it would move up by
approximately two weeks when I would
have to give the board of Finance their
budget um but that's well after I've
developed my budget so what that does is
that shortens any potential Review Time
by the board of Selectmen under our
current system the board of selectman
still has to make by Charter certain
decisions like what is the paying
compensation for Town
employees um and they have to weigh in
on the big picture items that the town
wants to accomplish um but that should
be doable I I see no reason why it
couldn't
happen I I think the other advantage of
this too is that it will put there is so
much pressure put on I I don't know if
the other board selectman members felt
it I certainly felt I think I did and I
I certainly on the board of Finance I
there was a lot of
Heming and hawing um about can this can
this budget get through a town meeting
to the full to the whole town so I think
it's going to allow them to focus um a
little more on the bigger picture stuff
and getting it through and and not get
dug down on the nuances of is this going
to get to a full Town vote because I
think a lot of times we we put a budget
together and we thought this is the
right budget for the town this is the
right number that we need but we don't
know if we can get through step one to
get every everybody to have a fair vote
on it so I think it actually will will
be good for them in a way and I think
the process can work very
well all right so walk through the
process again Carol just so it's clear
for me because I'm sitting there
thinking
that I just want the board of Finance to
have an open meeting in the end to not
not finish it does not close until a
budget is ready for referendum so that
you can meet all your timelines that
that's in my head so what would we be
doing just be basically moving the board
of Finance process up by about three
weeks because right now traditionally
they have their public hearing on the
budget the last Wednesday of April he
then annual Town budget meeting one of
the first 10 business days of May and
then roll into a referendum
second Tuesday following our annual Town
budget we would just bumping them up by
approximately three weeks and we would
still do the same process Carol like
kind of like we did with the charter
commission here we could do we could do
a you do a public meeting and then close
the meeting and then the board of
Finance would simply have a short
meeting where they they've then motion
to move it to a referendum
correct
no no so what we would do because you
still want give the people the voice at
annual Town budget meeting eliminate
budget lines whatever they may do there
so you would have the board of Finance
public hearing let's say the first
Wednesday of
April but then and this is just putting
these days out here second the second
Wednesday of April the annual Town
budget week allow taxpayers their input
eliminate a budget item uh reduce a
budget item whatever they do if they get
a second and those votes then obviously
that's the budget that would go to
referendum but it would be automatic to
go to referendum okay it would not we
would not be taking a vote of people
send it to referend automatically go
they fall in I I guess my only question
was the logistics of do you have to have
a vote whether it's by the port of
Finance or by the public to move it to
referendum if you're saying we don't
need one then that's great I'm just want
well I mean if we do that's something
that we'd have to get um from Denice if
we would have to do that but I'm
thinking if we put that language in the
charter like Hein did where they uh
present
a
budget so if we were to put that we the
board of Finance has their public
hearing
then the town budget
meeting presents the budget for vote by
the annual budget
referend so that language would be in
the charter it's already dictating what
the
process so I am not sure what
Dennis will say but it looks like Hein
does it
[Music]
just okay but Hein goes right to
referendum it goes straight so it's the
board of Finance public
hearing they present the budget for vote
by the annual budget referendum so if we
were going to go and have the board of
Finance public hearing the first
Wednesday of April and then the annual
Town budget meeting second Wednesday of
April and then you know after whatever
adjustments are made by the meeting then
that budget is presented for vote by the
annual budget
reference be automatically
sent so we're going to give a town
meeting the ability to now so right now
a town meeting they there there are
motions made to reduce line items and to
reduce budget lines
correct we vote them up or
down and then we move to vote on the
entire
budget correct so we anyone can make
motions from the four they get a second
and it passes then that adjustment is
made the budget then at the end there's
ballot to send that budget with whatever
adjustments made by the
town to a
ref
okay but Carol at that process you're
saying it it's up or down adjustments
can be made
anyway budget go up the only adjustments
can be to reduce or eliminate lions
got
it for argument sake why couldn't you
make a motion to increase the budget if
you're going to send it directly to
right now if the public at the meeting
think the budget is too low for some
reason they have the ability to not send
it to referendum and give the board of
Finance the mandate to increase it
that's been done multiple times in the
past um when they cut the Board of
Education more than residents liked so
what happened if you did give them the
ability to increase and
decrease yeah but they currently to be
clear though they don't currently have
the option of decreasing the Board of Ed
until after it fails so yeah but like
resident state trooper say the board of
Finance got rid of it and people
said wait a second we really want this
well as as you pointed out earlier Jody
people could go and they could vote down
the budget at the at the vote you
know right but wouldn't it be more
efficient if they could add it at a town
meeting or adjust it Upward at a town
meeting I don't know if it's in the
charter I'm trying to find it I don't
know if it's step require
that you can increase or if it is
something that we can do by Charter uh
put that in where they are allowed to
make adjustments increasing the budget
but right now um I know that the only
adjustments are allowed I mean I'll be
honest with you I would not I personally
would not support an increase on any or
even the ability to increase I think the
problem with that becomes
there are there is sometimes a lack of
understanding from the general public
about the implications of numbers um you
know I mean part of it's going on right
now and the public is completely I think
unaware on a lot of levels um we have
right now um our budget for Ram our our
what we're paying into RAM has been
going down and so our budgets look
really good right now but there's a
population swing about to hit it's going
to go the other way and over the next
five years you're going to need give or
take a million dollars so you know
something in the neighborhood of three
plus Mills to fix the budget as we go
forward in the next fiveyear cycle so I
think that there are fiscal
issues that are much bigger than the
general public could understand unless
they're really were attending every
meeting and that doesn't happen that's
why we have representative bodies the
board of Finance the board of Selectmen
therefore
um I I I don't I don't agree with that
and I think the other thing we already
have protection for the board of
education so they get through and and
get a budget vote with their budget and
I think in general I would say I I'm
actually in favor of that on the town
side but I I just don't see the town
accepting it without a way to take it
down a
notch it's a very rare occasion where
they come in and say they want more
money right um so it's 803 B it says the
town meeting shall only have the power
to reduce or modify but not increase the
budget or any portion thereof there's
also like Aden said protection for the
board of edit said the town meeting may
not alter any specific items contained
in the budget proposed by the local
board
vat so but you can but you can but you
can go at the total for the Board of
Education and that's happened in recent
meetings well right so it has happened
where the board of uh finan just you
know 5% or
10% okay but listen my my my whole my
whole thought process here is simpler
less less less issues you know um we
don't want to make this more difficult
and I'll go to Adrian's point of the the
RAM and people not understanding I I
don't I don't believe that I think
people are smart enough to get it and
the issue with that Adrian's addressing
I don't believe is fully fleshed out
because I don't believe the numbers that
our school is providing line up exactly
with the way that the numbers line up
with maror and Hein so it's it's a you
know the sky just just for clarification
when you say numbers you're talking
about population population yeah okay
we're not talking about we're not
talking acal budget number because I no
no no no the budget I I understand the
total budget but the reason why we've
currently had a decrease is because our
population has fallen and there's
there's a fear and there's people saying
that our numbers are going to increase
you know significantly and I've asked at
the last meeting to get the numbers from
the Board of Education to align with the
other board of education so to make sure
that we're
not uh we're not counting our preschool
kids we're not counting some things the
other schools are not counting so we
understand where our population Falls
truly
and I I understand there's some concern
and it's it's it's it's legitimate I
just don't think it's as much as we're
saying I think we got to really get our
number alignment and that's a different
issue that's not for the charter so
let's just let's just move on to I try
to be simple Carol one sorry Jord one
thing Carol why why couldn't we just
have one meeting
and consolidate the meeting the hearing
and the meeting and and I don't I agree
with Adrian no up because no one in this
town wants more money like you know they
go to the referendum and vote and vote
no if they chose to if if if if the
board of Finance cut the state trooper
and it got through Jody just as a case
the budget would be voted down at
referendum probably and you know
then it
would go back and we'd go on cycle again
and what happens if it gets voted down
and we the the ram the budget you so you
have the second I guess you have from
the second week of
April is when that annual town meeting
is until the
ram budget at the same day so you really
if you get voted down you have to
somehow very quickly do another
modifications and vote do we have enough
time it's a week like you get another
week and then you have other problems so
you have to have the budget posted for
long enough if I'm an accurate darl I'm
sorry I did
that right so there would have to be
another the budget Bo of Finance would
have to have another meeting do the
budget and then we would at that point
just probably put something in like 803
we currently have where if it is
defeated at referendum then and still
follow that same
P well defeat defeating at referendum is
just a whole other process it's like
it's like what's the first date of the
referendum with the hope that it passes
on that date that Ram is being voted on
and then we move on if it fails it fails
and then we go through the steps to to
get another one done and another
referendum vote and so on and so on but
right the first one and I keep mentally
coming to it why do we allow the even if
they vote even if we vote to move the
budget forward the town meeting we move
to to to not approve the budget for
referendum why can't we have that
meeting stay open the board of Finance
goes and sits there and says these are
the adjustments we are going to make
they come back to the town meeting which
is still in session and you got to stay
there if this is the type of government
we want town meeting then you stay there
until a budget is approved to go to
referendum
or we could go and have public hearing
for the board of finance that public
hearing after they receive input from
the
public have that
adjourned then go into the annual Town
budget meeting where the public whoever
is attending is allowed to
vote budget
only this way it eliminate have right
section three and then whatever votes
are taken there that pass that is the
budget that will then be presented to
the annual budget
representa okay and I'm going to give a
hypothetical to everybody here the
people pack the town meeting they get 45
out of 47 people who show up to our town
meetings and they sit there and say I
want to make a motion to reduce the
Board of Education spending by
$100,000 and that motion
passes right because the Board of
Education doesn't think this cycle is
very bad they don't get people to come
to the town meeting it passes now we're
sending that to
referendum there is a clause in the in
the charter here too regarding reducing
it the law we can't reduce
board of education budget below the
required per pup spended okay but to be
clear Carol I thought there was also
when the bation happened and and I
apologize I didn't go and read that
section but I thought when the
bifurcation happened we put in there was
something that went in there that
protected the board of education so they
get at least one vote because of the
bifurcation oh I'm sorry could you
repeat that again what was that my
understanding I thought when the bation
of the budget happened right yes that
that because of that bation I thought we
there was some some language in there
that protected the school budget until
at least one vote
Happened One referendum vote right yeah
that's correct but what I'm saying
Adrian is is someone could go in isn't
that that is correct Eric's shaking his
head so Eric you know go ahead I I don't
believe that that's correct somebody
could still go to a current Town budget
meeting and make a motion to reduce the
AES
budget um or any line item line item and
if a majority of people at that meeting
approved it then it would be the what
would go to referend to referend yeah
and and that's correct and what Adrian
is saying at that at that referendum if
it's voted the budget
fails the budget fails it goes back to
the board of Finance but the next vote
is a bifurcated
vote okay Shannon can we can we ask
Shannon real quick Shannon may have some
feedback on this I just want to make
sure we're understanding this correctly
because it does matter to it's 803g
which is substitute budget did any
budget fail to gain final approval prior
prior to the beginning of the FAL year
the town want Implement a
substitute budget
um in the case of the board of education
budget in compliance with the minimum
budget requirement of
state so you know if somebody comes in
and wants to reduce the local board of
education budget so that it's below
that can't do that any we we we got but
you don't even want to go there because
there's a lot of issues related to the
m all saying the thing that we're
discussing here is just to try to get so
that we're saving money eliminating a
referendum and a town right you know
second referendum so the question is do
we want to do this do we want to move
our budget process
up the probably the best way to do it
would if you want to have the public
hearing for the Board of Finance first
and then have it adjourned to our annual
Town budget meeting on the first
Wednesday or second Wednesday in April
just to give everybody ample time to get
the budget prepared
then you know we can move forward and do
that just to have the one referendum but
the only way to do that would be just to
not have a vote at the annual Town
budget meeting
as to whether or not to send it to
referendum the wording in our Charter
would have to be the same so I would
annual budget
meeting so I would make a motion then
that we make the adjustments to align
our budget referendum with the Hein and
the ram school budget
referendum um with the caveat that we
still
include um we we do an uh a budget
meeting and or a hearing and then a
budget meeting back to back is that
correct Carol that's how I want to do
it I will have to check with Dennis to
make sure that legally I don't assuming
I can think of that would prohibit it
but we would still have to check with
Dennis to make sure so we'll let we'll
let Dennis make that adjustment but
assuming that we align with ram and that
we um would do we would not have a vote
it would automatically go to referendum
but that we would still have the ability
to reduce the budget as we currently do
correct because we're still given TX
paers their voice at the town meeting to
make their
votes I'm I'm I'm just going to sit
there and say I would I don't I don't
feel
comfortable I I I want to sit there in a
line don't get me wrong I want one
referendum one time spend the money one
time but I think you have to sit there
and make the town
meeting the requirement on it you can't
just I I don't believe and and it would
probably pass anyway I'm trying to think
in my head the vote scenarios like how
it would work at a town meeting if
someone made a motion to cut a
department or caught a budget line item
and then they sat there and they said
that's immediately going to referendum I
don't feel comfortable with that I think
what we need to do is make that
meeting stay open until the town meeting
the group approves a budget to go to
referendum even if there's a a
requirement that the board of Finance
has to go back in and modify numbers at
that meeting I mean that that's how I I
I look at it because I I have a
really I'm mentally trying to figure out
in you know going to those Town meetings
and watching ing people get up and make
their motions to to make cuts
um I mean what if they pack the vote
for state trooper I mean we wanted to
make reductions to state trooper but you
know there was a blowback from older
residents that so as you noted to Jody
earlier they would vote the budget
down correct but we don't want to get
into that you know that's a vicious
cycle then the budget gets bifurcated
and we have all the animosity
those things but those things happen
that's why you you know I mean what
Bolton went I I got just recently Bolton
has gone multiple rounds I think they
went like five Cycles recently you know
yeah but I'm really happy that we look
like a sane town with the exception of
the people writing letters to the River
East we look really good well the good
news is if you read the River East you'd
find out that they can't do they can't
do the national politics thing anymore
so that's okay good I'm happy about that
um
Jody's over question it's no because he
knows he's knows knows I'm right I am
the 10% on both sides is Jeff call
exactly so Jody what is you know what
Jody Bob's Bob's Bob's likees
Switzerland on most things um and and
Karen and Carol Le and that little group
is gonna they're GNA be quiet on this a
little bit unless we go too far off
track I think so Jody what do you think
you said anything it yeah no I like the
idea of trying to gain some efficiency
um so um you know it's a little bit hard
to follow because I'm I'm not deep into
this process today but it sounds like
you want to do a board of
Finance um public
hearing and for like the first week of
April and then the annual town meeting
could either be a week later or I think
what I'm hearing is could you do that
backto
back um and but the vote
is
um um and at the T anal town meeting I'm
fine with the process that's you know
people can do some level of reduction
although Adrian I I've been thinking a
lot about what you said and you know
sometimes people don't have the broad
perspective on finances that others do
so I do worry what Jeff is saying where
they might reduce something that's an
essential service or um or people have
broader ideas on but I think the the
endgame what here was to align the RAM
and our town budget May 6 so I'm not
sure what you
gain is do what do you gain by putting
the backtack annual town meeting in
Board of Finance public I I and see
generally speaking I would agree with
you I think it's better to give them at
least a week apart so that you could
have you you could have a board of
finance that could take the Public's
input make any last minute adjust ments
and also I think there there should
always be a case and I don't know that
we've been doing it most recently but
there should always be a case where we
actually present what our budget is but
why but not just what it is but why it
is what it is I think we need to do a
much better job of communicating that
not just at the meetings but but sending
out maybe a more detailed instead of a
postcard we send out a a one-page f you
know a one-page document that says hey
this is how we came up with this budget
you know
especially if we're going to go into
this process but that's a different
conversation are there are there
ma would make sense to to give people a
week get the board of Finance to make
whatever adjustments they receive at the
public hearing and then a week later if
we were to have our annual Town budget
meeting still allow the people to have
their voice in our budget process and
make reductions or ask questions but
then
automatically go to the annual budget
re why is why is that important I guess
today what it requires a motion to go
directly to the referendum yeah because
if we don't do that
then we're not going to be able to line
align with the ram budget referendum
which was the sole purpose of reviewing
are you asking about why why there's a
motion needed or why it has to go direct
why there's a motion like in today's
world there's a I guess a today it
sounds like there's a motion to send it
to to to town referend we are not going
to make a motion at the annual Town
budget meeting we're going to have the
wording in our Charter that at you know
the annual Town budget meeting will
present the final budget with any
adjustments that are made at that annual
Town budget to vote by the annual budget
referend all right can I ask for this
and I'll I'll pull my motion from the
floor would it make more sense at this
point to ask Carol can you just put it
in a formal document so we can all read
it and understand what it actually looks
like with the spacing a week from this a
week to that can we do that I will do
that
I just wanted to throw out the different
options that we have and what we would
have to do I thought it was just my
stroke brain that was I thought it was
just my stroke brain struggling to grasp
it sounds like maybe not it's not let me
let me say something here you guys are
all much better versed in the the
details and the nuances and what happens
when and this is obviously a complex
subject with some subtlety Carol you
brought some great ideas to the flooor
but it's clear also that a little bit of
modification is necessary there's still
a little bit of contention going on here
so yeah Adrien said what I was
struggling to find a a time to jump in
and say you need to put it in black and
white so that we can all look at it
because yeah I don't have a I'm not
struggling with a stroke brain but I'm
still struggling to follow along exactly
what happens when and under what
circumstances so can I just ask this
question before right speak with our
town attorney um and I know Jody you
were saying about have the public
hearing for the board of Finance let's
say the first Wednesday in April then
the next Wednesday the annual Town
budget meeting and then that goes
automatically to the annual budget
referendum on the Tuesday following the
first is that
what rest that's what I think you put on
the table and it sounded appropriate to
me I didn't I kind of like the idea of
having the space between the public
hearing and the I just didn't know if
that causes more money or causes trying
to avoid that um but it it does give
people time to
um right you know kind of you know Board
of Finance to take in the Public's
input a little bit in town and and then
make and I understand why you have to go
automatically out of that town meeting
to
referendum because you have to make that
sixth deadline or that that that where
they could get connected but I just
wanted to present you know everything
have everything on the table you know
that either go straight okay can p we
just wrap this up and say that we're
going to continue this item to next
week's meeting Carol you'll come back
with something that's a little more
formalized you'll share your screen
we'll review it again and hopefully not
talk about it for 45 minutes before we
come to a
consensus yes okay
great so let's go on to item five town
clerk position Adrien yeah um I'm gonna
apologize up front I'm not doing well on
the computer today so I'm not going to
try to share my screen I did send you
all the document um that came from Hein
um I also called um about five town
clerk's offices from our surrounding
towns to kind of get a feel for not just
what Hein is doing but what other towns
are Colombia is
now um elected sorry appointed um hired
um Bolton same situation um wendam so um
a lot of towns have gone in this
direction um the biggest thing you're
going to see is that there is a there is
a grave concern for when a town is doing
this that the cl's position
become isolated right so it needs to be
isolated from political issues it needs
to be isolated from say a town manager
that maybe doesn't agree with a town
clerk's handling of things but also
maybe from a board of selectman that
doesn't agree with it so there is um
everyone that I talked to every clerk
said the same thing um that if we go in
this direction we need to reference the
state statute that explains what is
required to remove a clerk and that that
needs to be the same guideline an
elected Clerk and that we should use
that same guideline that says that um
basically what other towns have done is
they say it has to be um that a town
manager um needs to agree with it it
can't just be a board of Selectmen that
um the board of selectman needs to agree
with the town manager that does it so
there's basically two steps there
um and that it has to be for cause it
can't be for you know any other you
willy-nilly
feelings of of a of a manager or a board
that that's upset with a town clerk it
needs to be for cause um and that we
should reference S statue that being
said they also all said that the reason
they went in this direction is that it
generally takes about four years to
learn the job and that's how long the
term is so basically you go in you get
going and four years later just about
the time that you're you know the job um
you got to run again um everyone said
that in bigger towns like say Hartford
or west Harford a town clerk could be an
elected position because you have 20
people in the office right so if if the
if the person that's at the top of the
pile um doesn't know all the statutes
and doesn't know every all the nuances
there's so many people in the office
that that you know that the group thing
think um Can can overcome that because
there's there's knowledge within all
those people but when you have such a
small office like ours we have two
people um you know if one person steps
away and the other person may not have
the institutional knowledge it's it's
problematic um in Hein one of the
biggest things pushing them is that
they're worried with a town three times
the size of ours that they don't have
enough of a population to put forward a
qualified
clerk someone that could learn their job
quickly and uh and get up and running um
so they they feel that this really
should be you know a hired slash um you
know appointed position so um I would
say I think
we I my recommendation is that we we
follow basically what what Hein is now
attempting to do um and what other towns
around us have already done and go in
this position go in this direction um if
you have any questions feel free I you
know I had about a
20 minute conversation with almost all
the clerks
so hey Adrien what's the D the downside
here of moving it to appointed right I
mean I I like in that in that um what
you standed out from Hein thank you was
excellent but it was funny I was reading
the cons and even the cons were Twisted
to be Pros the inverse it was like so
you know in my simple head the only
thing is thinking oh they're not a town
resident maybe they're not queued into
the culture of the town but so there is
there is an there is an old guard and
this actually is what happened in he and
the last time they tried to do this the
the the town clerk had been there for
you know 20 plus I think it was actually
30 years and I apologize I don't have
that off the top of my head but it was
it was a really long time and at the
last minute in the process she said
listen I don't I
really Town Charter Our Town Charter
actually has a difference for Town
residents to be uh to be hired for Town
jobs right um but there's no there's
nothing that forces a town to file that
so um there is always a concern that a a
a
nonresident gets a clerk position
because the clerk is so ingrained in the
community that and it does so much I
mean you know Carol's a Carol's
literally the embodiment of that think
of anything that you go to in town and
imagine that you know if you can find
something that car does not go to or
show up at I would be hard it's a hard
pressed thing and that is so common in
in the Works position in so many towns
they're so involved so there's a concern
the con is what happens if you get
someone that just isn't invested in the
town can do they just come in and do the
job check the box and leave because they
don't live there um that's a possibility
um it's a possibility you could hire a
town clerk that lives in town though um
and and and then they move for whatever
reason so you know there's there's
there's nuances to it um that was the
one thing that everyone said they they
that was their always their concern but
it really hasn't been the case there's
been situations where you know in each
town where either someone's a resident
of the town or someone is is willing to
make that thing and and the biggest
thing is that the reason that people
don't run is there's no job security
right so you have to be fairly
intelligent and and I'm not saying this
to make Carol feel better but you need
need to be fairly intelligent you have
to have a really good understanding um
and understand that there are to put
this in perspective there are over 500
statutes I couldn't believe this but
it's true there's 500 statutes on the
state books that specifically reference
the town clerk that's how involved the
job is with state so um you
know the the cons
are an employee that is not connected to
the job that's the con right that's the
risk um I think we could hopefully um I
don't think you know one thing that was
brought up about this is that it should
not be a position that is hired by a
board of Selectmen it should not be a
position that is hired by a town manager
it should not be a position that's hired
by so you don't want just one group to
make that decision that you should at
least put together a committee that then
hires the person based on a
recommendation um but but certainly
group so you might uh compose that of
say two members of a board of Selectmen
two members of a board of Finance the
town manager um maybe someone from the
assessor's office um you know you might
even want someone you know from you
certainly want someone from the general
public so you put together a group and
that group makes that decision for that
ultimately to hire that person but it
should not be left in one Department
because this is this person touches so
many different areas you know so
thanks so Adrian do you have any
specific language recommendations
modifications to the the charter I mean
you you covered a lot of ground and
touched I don't and to be honest with
you because this there's going to be
some nuances to this I did not go
digging into the charters to see how
it's written yet I think the next step
would be um if if the group feels that
we're still going forward with this then
we I should say I'll take the time to to
reach out and pull some of those
Charters and try to codify the language
that would work and then we can you know
pick through it but I didn't want to
spend a lot of time doing that until we
um until we know that this is this is
going to be something that we're gonna
we're going to want to still move
forward on I I'm I kind of think it's a
no-brainer but you know um you know it
is what it is it's a group decision so I
think we all concur that this is a a
weighty and substantial uh issue that
that you know deserves our our full
consideration um so who wants to make a
motion that we will continue to consider
this issue and move
forward I'll make I'll make a motion
that we continue to continue this to the
next meeting moving forward and I would
come back with language suggested
language for the for the charter Charter
adjustments I will come up with the Lang
language the charter adjustments I would
ask the town attorney to um specifically
point to anything in the charter that
needs to be removed that's conflicting
that I don't want to take on that
responsibility okay I'll second that any
further discussion on this
subject okay all those in favor I I I I
is there anyone
opposed okay it's unanimous keep doing
your homework Adrian okay who's who
second that was that Bob I did
thanks and just as a a side note I think
somewhere in the charter in my reading
that there any of any job Adrian would
be by a group of any job specific like
that would be by a group as you
referenced uh a member of the board of
selectman or two members of the board of
selectman and then we do reference in
certain places where we take um we would
take Town clerks from other towns to do
the interview process just is a side
note so everybody understands them that
is written somewhere I just read it I
can't find it
written okay
Bob Bob you're
muted the dog was barking uh Jeff you're
up ordinance
procedures all right
um in our Charter well like the first
thing I should do is just so everybody
understands because ordinance can mean a
lot of different things as it as it
written the definition of an ordinance
is uh a law set forth by government
Authority specifically a municipal
regulation so in essence these
ordinances are municipal
regulation um and the issue that we
really have in our Charter and and just
so you understand we are not solving
every issue on the ordinances today
because um if you search uh the charter
there's somewhere in the range of 40
some
OD ordinance words sprinkled out
throughout the charter different
meanings and have different things
associated with them um the biggest
issue that I would do is because
ordinances
are the purview of the board of selecman
right now but we have a a minor and a a
definition of a minor ordinance in our
Charter that I would totally delete so
section um 105 definitions 105h minor
ordinances I would delete that and come
in with some word that minor ordinances
in effect before the the date that this
Charter revision becomes U implemented
will continue to remain for the board of
Selectmen to amend and repeal
um so the issue ends up being due
ordinances and and then in my analysis
you have to go through the way that an
ordinance if the board of selectman had
the ability to create these ordinances
and the other thing for everybody is
there's a document on our
website um that lists out all the
ordinances that have been in place so I
went to see Carol this morning and Eric
and there's a document for ordinances
that's about 78 pages long
that lists out the items that are
outside of the charter and a lot of
these
are not currently
uh I mean I wouldn't sit there and say
Carol all these Fallen but Carol would
know better than I would but I would sit
there and say there's so many ordinances
and they go back so far with so many
little dollar amounts we really as a
town need to probably clean up our
entire entire ordinance collection um
but the issue ends up being believing
that the word minor ordinance and
allowing the board of Selectmen to be
able
to put in place
ordinances um and if if need be because
there's so much uh uh see this is the
whole thing I don't want to go to Tom
mating for for this type of these types
of transactions so I would recommend uh
and and I I think we need to do exactly
what we just did with the Tom clerk
which is say okay we're going to move
forward with this uh and the one thing
that I did identify is eliminating the
minor
ordinances uh allowing the board of
Selectmen to continue in it's uh and
it's saying Authority
and you know you would give in section
301 in the general section you would
make a change in that area to including
but not limiting the authority to
approve an act appeal and modify all
ordinances after a public hearing so
you're still going to have the public
hearing you're still going to have the
public be able to communicate to you on
this um but you're you're going to allow
the board of Selectmen to allow after
that public hearing to enact the
ordinances and you know right now we
have section 402 that sits there and
says you know the town meeting um has
the ability to
Act of what's considered or identified
as major ordinance so my issue is
eliminate the difference between minor
and major allow the board of Selectmen
to enact and Implement uh
a an ordinance after a public hearing
and then we move on to the issues of how
would an ordinance if the public
disagreed with it be overturned and that
ends up falling into
you know section 305 about petitioned
Tom meeting you
know and and I'm telling you and I think
everybody would understand if if the
board of Selectmen made an ordinance or
enacted an ordinance that everybody
didn't like um there's two things that
would happen one is you would petition
to get the
ordinance revoked and
removed and you wouldn't vote for those
Selectmen in future elections it's the
value of the
Democracy that's basically where I I am
at if I was you know if we could approve
that if we wanted to move forward with
that I would have the town attorney
suggest appropriate language for the
various sections that are impacted by
ordinances within the town chart I
I um I my opinion on this in order for
me to support it I would want two things
to happen I would want there' be a 120
day delay before an ordinance goes into
effect and and the second one would be
that um I would want to see instead of a
10% requirement for um signatures
collected let's lower that to 5% and
then it would automatically go to a a
town
vote I think in my read of this that
number is way lower than 10% is it
really yes okay I didn't read that
section and I didn't see anything from
you quantifying it I I I know in in in I
think in State Statute it's actually a
10% so if we have something lower that's
great 42% 49
residents 49
residents
that petition 49 residents can cause a
town meeting yeah yeah okay
would you do it to a town meeting though
or would you do it so my I guess my
thought was the number was
higher
and instead of doing a town meeting
because you again this goes back to the
whole idea of having as many people have
a saying these things as possible you
just hold the ordinance and put it on
the next ballot that you've got going so
if it happens if it happens over the
winter right between November and the
referendum boat you could throw it out
at the same time you know for the budget
if it happens after the budget cycle but
before November it would fall into the
November vote cycle and you would just
you don't have to have something
separate it's an ordinance it's not
something that has to be passed today
obviously you just throw it out the next
ballot and let people vote on it but
make the number higher you know and I
just throw in that kebron section 405 of
their Charter current Charter power of
overrule ordinances adopted by the board
of C
so all actions of the board of Select
and ordinances except emergency
ordinance shall be subject to over at a
special referendum in the following
manner so it outlines that a petition
must be filed within 20 days after final
action by the board of Select
2% of the electors of the town of HEB he
a town much larger than us only
2% as determined by the latest official
registry and request that the ordinance
be submitted to the voters of the town
for special referendum so it spells out
a procedure so it's
still it doesn't give the board of
select men
you right
to well you still would have the right
to enact ordinance but then the electors
of town would be able to come forward
with
of registered voter
signatures to force a referendum on so
if we use that if we use that it'd be 70
people give or take right 3500 electors
perc
yeah thoughts guys
girls sounds reasonable Adrian have to
be some type of protection for the
people if we were going to move forward
and allow for to select in that um to do
that another way to do it would be to
more clearly defined and I know it's
hard to Define minor and major but we
could give examples um I was just kind
of looking around different larger towns
and they have extended examples of a
minor
ordinance are allowed to Ena
we have elected officials and we you
know they're not going to go off the
rails but the public needs some fail
safe mechanism in case there's discourse
so I kind of like the idea of you know I
didn't like this major minor it gets the
definitions always get hard so I think
the path Jeff was on with some
modification from
Adrian I think
works at least from my view which is
giving the board of Selectmen who we all
have
elected a little bit of continuing that
flexibility to put something in place
but then giving the and giving notice I
think that's what Adrien wants and I
that you know notice is fine except I do
see sometimes there could be an emerging
thing um uh but then what's the it
sounded like there was some recourse
what's the recourse if Town didn't Town
people don't like it sending it to it
goes
down right it go it goes down how Oh you
mean if well car is saying they'd have
to get 2% which would be 70 people in
our town to do what what happens that's
after okay wait wait wait current
process in Carl correct me if I'm wrong
is an ordinance goes to a town meeting
and gets voted up or down that for major
ordinances town meeting upper down what
we're saying is we're eliminating the
town Le up or down and now we're dealing
with the recourse JY as to how if it is
a negative ordinance that that a group
of residents believes and they can get
enough of 2% of the electors which is
low for me it's low I understand Hein is
what is it kind three times our size
with the number of electors so the
actual number of people that they have
to get to is is greater so um
I would sit there and I I could I could
I could I could live with the
the I could live with a group of
individuals in the town not agreeing
with an ordinance and putting it on the
next available
ballot that's what I would ask you no
special no special I mean I'm trying to
avoid extra work for people like um so
adrianne's request was 120 days right
Carol your your issue
was how how
we how we allow the residents to
revoke an ordinance right right because
well the way Hein does it is they have a
public hearing and publication so the
board of Selectmen if they're going to
enact an ordinance have to have at least
one public hearing
notice of which have to be given five
business days four and then um you hold
that public hearing before you pass the
ordinance but then okay it also gives
the public an easier there's a statutory
petition process too but this would be
clearly spelled out in the charter and
the people would understand and I hear
what Adrien is saying
on the next election but if you know you
pass an ordinance the day after the
November election right um would you say
that that would be on our budget
referendum that
ordinance I'm okay honestly I'm okay
with the I just want to make sure we
have something easy and clear if if I
have no problem with with adopting what
Hein has done um with you know maybe we
just make make a slight modification and
give a little more time for people to
get the the the 70 people or whatever it
is they're going to need in town um
maybe it's a little easier in Hein to do
that because they have you know they
have a lot more stuff large population
what does the 70 people trigger though
is that a a town meeting uh a town a
town referendum right or a town meeting
so what it triggers is the number
required for the petition so this power
of overrule for ordinances right with
Hein a petition must be filed within 20
days after the final action by the board
of selected so if you're saying to
extend it Adrian to give them 45 days in
which to obtain the petition there's
ation form that they would have to
obtain from and what's Jody's asking is
from there do we go to a town meeting or
do we go to a referendum vote it would
go straight to a referendum if they came
in with the required number of petitions
they I'm good with that I'd be good with
that as long as we move it from you know
20 days to you know 30 or 45 either one
would work for me so I want to see if I
understand this right we're saying that
the board of Selectmen can pass an
ordinance and if the town doesn't like
it they can petition to get a referendum
to overturn the ordinance yes if the
commission has mov forward with allowing
for select to enact ordinances yes this
is a protection for the residents of
band over to get that overturned now in
Hein what they do is they have um that
if the ordinance um they have within 30
days have to hold the
referend if they have the required
number of s so you would have set date
as to when we would have to have the
referent right now petitions people can
petition by Statute bring it forward to
the board of Select and if they deem it
a ferous petition they don't have to act
on it just be set us up um so they're
petitioning
or this is a run out you know a standard
plane
proceed okay and and I don't have any
issues with the public hearing uh
waiting period on enactment I think what
we have to sit there and consider
is
if if you give them 45 days residents
enough time to get signatures and they
get signatures it's a question of when
that referendum occurs and how it falls
within the calendar you know so to me
I'm sitting there always looking at this
going it can wait I don't care if it
waited 365 days like we would never be I
mean as long as I would be on board of
Select we would never put
a an ordinance on the agenda the the
December meeting right after an election
and and cause problems I mean I just ask
everybody like to look at you know when
we give the community the ability
to go to referendum or go to town
meeting it does take time and cost us
money so and that's all I ask everybody
to think about is like when does it go
to referendum not a special referend
for are you are you okay with it just
holding over then I mean yeah I mean we
did it we look at the town meeting we
just did we held over everything for you
know months and months and
months does anyone else have an
objection with it once it gets thing
getting held over to the next so we
don't have to spend money on a special
referendum I have one other question for
you Adrian you mentioned that any new
ordinance would have an automatic 120
days stay um what's the purpose of that
well it gives you two things it gives
you the the petitioning time right and
and then so your petitioning time then
um I also think that it gives a legal
Authority if someone for whatever reason
wants to challenge it Beyond a
petitioning or say rejection of petition
whatever whatever it it puts it in a
holding pattern until until that those
processes can play out that's all
I thought we just reduced 120 days to
yeah we we can reduce it I don't I don't
have a problem reducing it but I but
again as long as we have these other
metrics in place I'm fine with
that and I'm open to any suggestions
like I have no Pro think carolly
suggestion you know hebin has a good
thing that works let's do that I don't
think we need to reinvent the wheel you
know okay so I I don't have a problem
with what Carol said From hein's
perspective I mean you just want hold
you just want to hold it I just don't
want everybody to just run out and get a
petition right of 45 voters and then
we're required 70 in our case 70 but
yep okay um 70 um 2% of
3500 so Adrian we typically have around
2300 registered voters in the town so 2%
would be it's 2,300 I thought it was
3,300 I mean I thought I looked it up on
the state 33 is our population Adrian oh
I'm sorry I I apologize that's okay it's
about 23 register apologize Eric you are
correct 23 it is yeah 2300 so it's in
essence off of the state information it
was I I did the math on that section 2%
of was 49 residents what are you an
accountant now or something yeah you
know he told me to do some research and
Bob gave me a list that he gave me a
list of things I had do I went out and
did it sorry um but yeah 49 people and
they can sit there and and file a
petition I'm okay with that I'm okay
just I do not want to see the town have
to absorb a special referendum that's
fine especially with the number being so
low yeah so we hold over does anyone
have objection to a hold over well why
not talk about raising the number from
2% to 5% and just to let you know if we
had a referendum where we had
paper ballots and we do hand account it
really is not that
expensive just say it it is not it is
not but we now have to pay for our
regist voters and everybody we have to
call them in
for items we could also set the
referendum hours from noon until
8 salaries took 8 hours they
14 right what's it what's it cost us for
the mailer Carol it was it like Couple
Grand the mailer it's about three for
$400 is that it that's it and because
right now we're doing the um half sheet
postard and then if we do the hand count
which it does not take a lot of time the
paper ballots are made here in the house
just like for annual budget meeting and
we could have register our voter so je
Jeff okay we can't Jeff you did your
homework you did your homework can we do
the same thing with yours can we have
you Quantified it in a in a statement
and we'll vote on it next week next next
meeting yeah absolutely so I just want
to make sure so public hearing a a a
hold time to allow for a petition Y and
then the issue related to the referendum
would be held over until a regularly
scheduled c yeah I'm good with that so
so so the ordinance stays in effect
until then is that how no no no no
because once if if they didn't get it in
within the 45 days that go into effect
if they did get it in then it would be
held because it has to go to reference
it's paused until the following when
it's okay got it got it yes thank you
okay I do I do wait B one thing I do
believe we should sit there and and put
on next week's agenda the section 305
petition Town meetings and the
percentage of Voters required for that
type of petition put it put it all in
your in what you want us to vote on next
week but it wouldn't be a petition town
meeting Jeff it would be similar to what
or exactly what he wrote power of
overrule ordinance adopted by the board
of Select me it wouldn't be a special
town meeting because the petition would
force referendum
here understood understood all right let
me let me make a motion here okay that
we let's let's uh wrap up discussion on
this we're in general agreement on what
needs to happen uh Jeff you're going
to turn make make concrete out of your
out of your ideas you know give us some
specific language where it's appropriate
on the ordinance side as well as any
other parts of the um the charter that
get affected such as as the town
meetings as you see fit and you can
present those things to us next week so
that was kind of a rambling motion there
that we continue this to next week that
we all approve to move forward yeah why
does it have to be a motion it because
it doesn't we're not enacting anything
yeah if we don't do if we don't do these
motion Bob does not get to feel like
being a chair it's important for him so
we need to do this for Bob This Is Us
supporting Bob so Bob I'm gonna second
motion thank you all in favor hi hi okay
let's move on I'll
abstain you're abstaining Bob that's
just mean Jody it's really mean that's
fine okay so I'm up again uh the next
item is
uh uh not electing first selectman
instead having a chairperson um that is
elected by the board of Selectmen as is
done in the Board of Education and board
of Finance um I've done some research on
this the language changes in the charter
are actually very simple so simple that
I haven't written it up yet there are a
few additional things though that I want
to look into regarding uh state law
because state law talks about uh uh
first select first Selectmen quite a bit
and I want to make sure that we're not
running a foul of anything in there
before we we move forward with this and
I just want to as an side um one of the
things that was mentioned at the first
meeting uh was can we modernize our
language and simplify it and you know
come into uh alignment with uh modern
language which the way that that I took
it was among other things gender
neutrality um I looked at what people
are calling a board of Selectmen in
other places and the terminology that I
found was Board of selectors or select
TS you know instead of a select man a
selector um and we could certainly go
ahead there's about 200 places in the
charter where that L where select man or
select men occurs the problem arises in
that Connecticut state law still uses
the term Board of Selectmen and
Selectmen and we have kind of a a a
responsibility and and a charge to stay
in alignment with what the state law
does and so you know I'm not even going
to suggest that we go there that route
um until the state does you know what
they do we can follow but it's it's
opening up a can of worms if we were to
to try to go down that it's like I said
just a digression but it was brought up
at the the the first meeting modernizing
the language so I looked at it and I
said no this is this is not the way that
we're going to go actually I chatted
with a few other people who who
concurred the same way so I'm going to
come back next week with some more
concrete language and hopefully places
where this touches state law and doesn't
run a foul of it well here on Jeopardy
next week we'll have language for all of
these things to go uhuh I'll take it for
200 Alex um all right that brings us to
Jody increasing the number of candidates
allowed for the board of
Selectmen sure let me share
screen can you do that or do I have to
do that for you um I think I can
let me see share there you go what's
that what's that Little Engine That
Could I think I can't I can't remember
what it
is honey here we go uh if I can get pull
this up nope wrong the document hold on
that's just oh you're using Mac huh yes
the minutes I'm typing here which
explains why it's taking so
long here we
go um so I think the idea I was asked to
evaluate is to increase the number of
nominees for the board of Selectmen by
each political party um and I think
Adrien said maybe possibly the four from
each party um and I think believe the
rationale was really to try to increase
the competitive nature with more
candidates um having some form of
contested election surface more ideas
constructive debate on improvements for
our town um Carol pointed me to section
203 of the charter that states a
political party May nominate no more
than three members one of whom shall be
designated nominee for the office of
first
selectman um and I think we have an item
and maybe I just missed it where we're
going to change not actually have a
first selectman but potentially have
that as a um as someone that's um
decided by the board of Selectmen and
not voted but regardless it it I don't
think it matters in in this case
so the background is the current Board
of Selectmen has five members uh with a
requirement for minority representation
I think effectively ensuring a 32 split
on the
board um and current ballot has voters
selecting three
Representatives
so um I think Bob you had asked for
what's the implementation or transition
here and this I think would be simple as
to change to a language in the charter
um and each party could submit whatever
number of nominations I used four um for
this ballot pros and cons um I think
this is more choice because you have
more people on a ballot um and you may
get more people involved in the
political process the con is that I was
kind of struggling because it may not
have any impact if the political parties
choose not to increase the number of
nominees due to diluting the votes of
the top three so this so I really came
up with three two questions for for
folks because honestly this didn't make
sense in part of me was like from the
math perspective I wasn't quite sure why
a party would want to do it so why would
a party want to put four
names if they're trying to get three uh
three of
two um and and I guess and then I asked
myself is the rationale for this change
already being achieved within the
political parties right I like uh you
know
caucuses for the parties or is there
multiple candidates coming forward so
that's what I thought through on this
and open to any corrections or
conversation let me bring down let me
stop sharing
here I can figure out how to do
that stop share there you
go so it didn't make sense to me but um
I'm open to thoughts here maybe the idea
surf is part of another idea that we
continue to pull forward but um is this
coming from you as a Mac User
or I'm sorry I don't understand your
reference I question your judgment
that's all when you I mean you know giv
your choice of operating system ah okay
got it you're poking um yeah no I guess
if I was sitting in a Democratic or
republican caucus and I wanted to win
three of two right and maybe I have that
assumption wrong that it's always has to
be 32 um it's like why would you put
four on a ballot and spread your and you
only had three choices you would be
spreading your numbers right would but
you would still be allowing the elect
both that number of
CES you know you'd increase the number
that they can vote for and how
does the CAU the caucus doesn't know
who's going to be popular at that
election
so have would have better ODS you don't
know who's going to be you might be more
you're going to be more popular than I
am on the board of Select ballot you
know you don't know who the
elect got it so you're suggesting a
caucus could say I want to put four
because more more options more
possibility that one of these is going
to
strike old with the with the with the
town in some way um but the other part
the the contrarian side of that is well
then you're kind of you know does or
does it spread the vote so but maybe
leave that to the caucuses I don't care
you know this gets complicated though I
mean like you know I think the only
reason Jeff beat me is because he was
Santa Claus and I was the Grinch right
it could be that you lose to me because
you're a Mac User and I'm a you know I'm
a I'm a Windows guy who knows but I'm
just I don't I don't know
I I think there I think her you know
Carol's point is true though that that
um you know caucuses are trying
sometimes to make a a hard decision um
and I think giving the public a little
bit wider choice if it's available can
be a good thing I
do I do worry though that you end up
with um
as you start I mean we're having a hard
enough time getting enough people on to
to run for these things in the first
place you can end up with a situation
where you know four Republicans end up
you know running against two Democrats
or three Democrats right so you you
could end up with you know we just can't
get enough people to fill all those
spots that want to run so you know what
I mean you can end up with a very
lopsided situation there as well and it
gets even more lopsided when you start
spreading out the vote over eight people
you know
so um it's true if we increase the
number that El or can vote for because
on the board of Finance we have our
major
munici four members of seven member
Board of Finance are
left voters can vote for people they can
vote for up to four we
restrict for when we divide it with the
first left I can only V one first and
then two on the board of and five are
going to be so if we were to
open if did decide to eliminate her
selecting and just word of Selec and let
them elect their cheer
in and we did do for each
elor Carol Carol I don't mean to
interrupt you can you just either lean
forward a little or pull the mic towards
okay I I don't know if there's something
wrong with this microphone but um I'm
just saying it would increase the number
that each elector can vote for so if
each Town committee could
nominate let's say four
people uh Run for the board of Select
then we could increase the number that
the elector and vote for five rather
than one for first selection and two
for if you're opening up that way so do
it like we do for the board of Finance
four seats are up you can vote four
members I think that works well on a
seven member board though right is Board
of Finance seven that is correct yes it
kind of makes sense if you're stag also
staggered terms right right yeah je I'm
interested in your thinking on this I
know you were one of the folks you kind
of brought this forward but I didn't
know it was part of a package of other
things
originally well I was uh a believe I'm a
believer that they should appoint in a
seven member board I believe it's it's
effective to
appoint uh the chairperson
um I would sit there and tell you under
our current current structure I would
sit there and get rid of the whole the
the first selectman office is you run
for it and you win or lose if you win
you're in you're you lose you're out and
and you don't get the roll off
into the select board
um and then you should have each party
should be should should put up six
members or three candidates each for six
positions
and then they get to um win either three
positions or or two positions because
you're still going to have minority
interest so if the first selectman wins
and he's a Democrat then you're gonna
only have another two Democratic
positions available if he's a republican
same thing so um I will tell you Jody
the issues from
a
um a caucus are going to be for the most
part very
they're they're going to watch out for
their party it's just the reality of it
you're going to watch out for your party
and if you have two solid candidates
that are going to get on there and you
you you sit there and you split the vote
somehow um you know like the Democrats
this this cycle put up uh three
candidates to the three candidates and
we didn't have any more but three
candidates to the
the Democrats only had two seats they
put up a third candidate they they
really ran that one individual candidate
very hard and that candidate got more
votes um and some of those things are
unfortunate but if you sat there and you
didn't let votes roll over from the
board of selectman then people would
make decisions as to where they would
need to be so I I actually think you run
the first selectman as its own race and
then you have four positions on the
board and you put up as many candidates
as you think because you know you can
get up to three of those potential seats
depending on what happens I'm sorry I
guess I missed Bob what was that I
missed our conversation on not having a
first selectman instead having a
chairperson elected that was be
conversation before yeah so are we going
back on that now no no no I'm listen I'm
telling you all of these issues are
potentially not moving forward because
they may not get approved you have to
realize that every every issue that's
coming up from us is going to end up in
front of the board of Selectmen and it
only takes two people to vote against
one of the items we bring up for it not
to move forward so you have to be
cognizant of the fact that things may
not always turn out the way we want them
why does it why is it two why is it a
five person board can't three because
you have to have
80% you have to have 80% of the board of
Select and approve the charter
revision that's okay that's just on
Charter revision yeah got it and is it
in ality or can there be modifications
that come back I would hope we'd put
these out as individual items and then
you'd allow the board to sit there and
pick the individual items so we get get
10 items in and one item fails and you
move on got it but if you have something
that's if we have something that we put
together like for instance um we moving
a budget referendum and we're also
adjusting something you know or in this
case you have um candidates and you have
the select board you could group those
together and say we want to do this
because that one is one really doesn't
work without the other right we could
ask the board of Selectmen to put those
together if we feel that's
appropriate yeah yeah so I I guess I was
operating under the the the assumption
that it's three people put up by it's
the five member board with today's world
is
three uh that are nominated from each
party sort of in my mind operating
whether whether it's a separate first I
was operating where it wasn't really a
first select M world right where where
each party just puts up three and then
that board I I guess I was assuming
number seven on our list or that that
item where we were going to just have
the board select the chairperson and I
kind of thought we're having that same
conversation okay no and you are and I'm
telling you to be careful related to
those items because you you're asking
you okay let's sit there and go to your
whole issue you have you have a five
member board that's all we have and you
want to put up three candidates so that
means one person is gonna lose yes but
that's what we have today right that's
that's basically what we have today I
mean we have we had you you you the way
that I believe it's written is you have
to have three candidates and one of
those individuals has to run for the
first yes so yeah so so again I just
didn't understand why we wanted to add a
worth mathematically it just kind of
felt funny I mean trying to play Devil's
Advocate and say well gives people more
choice and they might hit you know
strike gold and I get that but if I was
a strategist at the
caucus I guess I I don't know go ahead
point so can we for clarification
because I I'm I'm totally I'm totally
lost here and I'm trying not to swear
because my brain goes there um uh what
are we doing exactly are we actually
talking about are we talking about these
as one issue or not because honestly if
we're doing it for the whole board then
I think the four works if we're doing it
and we're not changing the board you
know they to an
elected if we're keeping an elected
first selectman versus a a um a selected
by the board um selectman for selectman
like one one one I'm in favor of and
when I'm not like if we get we eliminate
the first elect position as a as an
elected position that you run for then I
think the four works I think if you're
not eliminating it then you know then
maybe it
doesn't Bob back to you buddy I think
you had the one on the first selectman
right yeah and like I said I haven't
I what I've come up with is that it's a
simple thing for us to
do uh linguistically logistically you
know the modifications to the to the
actual Charter are fairly limited um
what I'm not sure of is what the
implications are Visa how our Charter
lines up with state law for example uh
it doesn't say it in our Charter but
state law talks about how the first
selectman is the chief of police uh but
but then it the the state law also
doesn't it deliberately says don't have
a definition for what chief of police
means and so other you can but other
places have chief of police that are are
appointed or come from within the rank
so I I don't know that we got to get
into the nuances of that but what I'd
like us to do is can we at least ask
everyone on the board to give their
opinion as to how they want to move
forward on this yay or nay and and and
whether they want are we grouping these
together and because you know do they
want four not want four like I think we
need to figure out what the heck we're
excuse my
French Carol how many how many um
positions do we have on the ballot or a
B are we limited by State
Statute no we can by Charter
B the number the only we are limited by
state
staff
voting
Carol can't hear you then why not open
it up to every why put a limitation on
the number that a party can put
up I mean a party is not putting up more
than three people I'm just telling you
with the current strategy Jody it's just
math why would you ever do
that that was the conclusion I came to
with a five person board and you're
trying to win three you're trying to win
three winning three is because we do
greater than minority rep on our Board
of Selectmen and our loal board
we do it on every board we do it on
every major board the board of Finance
the board of Selectmen yeah we do don't
we follow state statute for minority rep
on the board of Finance the only boards
we have are that Minority rep is Define
by our Charter and we do greater than
for minority rep
ismen and the local
gr I thought it was also done on pnz no
well to to make this simple I don't have
a motion to put forward on increasing
the number because it didn't make sense
to me so if someone else would like to
make that emotion or or um or combine it
with something else we can otherwise I
would scratch this
off does it make sense if we eliminate
the um you know we're talking about if
it goes one way if we were to uh not
have the first selectman as elected does
it still make sense to have three and
three on the ballot or does it at that
point make sense to have four and four I
think then it makes sense to go four and
four personally I'm why why Adrian if
you're only electing
three like P me through the logic why do
you think that
helps well I think that I personally
think that it gives you a better
opportunity to put up more candidates
that you know that moved down that list
um you don't again you don't know how
candidates are going to are going to
actually pull with the with the with the
with the public I mean I can I can
personally tell you that I've seen
candidates that got into an election and
I thought there's no way they're going
to get votes and they did and then you
have candidates that you put up that you
thought were a shoe in and they didn't
even they didn't even show so I think
the caucus it gives the Fus more
opportunity to put up quality candidates
um and put up more diverse candidates by
doing that and I think that's more
important when you when one of those
candidates may or may not be moved up to
the to the first the first chair you
know yeah I don't I I'll say this I
don't see a downside to it um it kind of
puts it in the caucuses hands to figure
out what strategy that they might want
right
I mean I'm all for more people running
but I just don't see the logic I don't
see why and and to be really honest I
was I was I'm not on the Democratic town
committee um so I can't sit there and
tell you that uh but I know if I was
advising the Democratic town committee I
would tell them you don't want to put up
any more than three people because you
want to maximize your your ability to
get votes especially with what said is
is we could only vote for two people on
the selectman line and and it should be
select member or select person and you
could vote for one person on the
selectman first selectman line so you're
minimizing that if you spread that out
if you put four people up and a certain
you know a certain appeal is to vote for
a Democrat you might not pick the
Democrat that has the most votes because
then you you're competing back against
who's going to win three seats on the
board so mathematically it doesn't work
got it but so it sounds like we have a
gating issue though and maybe Adrien
Jeffy are saying this too it's like
maybe we need to figure out the first
Selectmen or appointed from within the
board and then come back to the number
I'm fine with that moving on that to to
next week's uh or they say if we were to
open that that up and do four and four
and you allow the electors to vote for
any five because on the board of finings
agreed I I I totally agree and that's
and that's my point that so so the
voters are picking those members just
like on the board of finings there are
four seats up when this past November
there were four seats up so each party
could nominate four
members so and the elector could vote
any
four so this way if you open up the
board of Selectmen the same way where
you
each Town committee can put up
four voters can vote five and then they
would if we op to go that way then the
elected Board of Select
who's the chairman and vice chair and
and this is Carol where I was going with
the Town Council in that it would be
four members running in one cycle and
then in the next cycle there would be
three members and that makes sense to me
but when you're voting all for five and
you only have a limited number of
candidates you're you're basically
selecting who you don't want on the
committee and and that's okay everybody
can we can call it come of our mind but
the math for what Jody's deal de with
doesn't work
the or also create the staggered Board
of
selction because the transition is
already written out in chapter 10 of our
town Charter and it shows the transition
how we phased in when we were going on a
five member Planning and Zoning
commission how we phase in so that we
had the three and two bagger
terms that's not difficult to do that so
when we had our minor municipal election
obviously we've all been elected for
years seven but what we would do that
would be our major election we would
have three members of the board of s
have their seat
understood Okay and like I say just
follow chapter 10 for the transition
same thing we did when we initiated our
first Charter in
1999 I brought this issue up two
meetings ago about pnz with staggered
terms and asked why we do it and Jeff
responded pnz is not as political as uh
Board of Selectmen is I believe that was
your your
explanation but it's also continuity on
the board too in intention of knowledge
to share
[Music]
with yeah but the the party minority
representation how do you deal with that
with staggered seems odd right like if
if the two Republicans are up and it's a
three-
two but four one minority rep on a five
member board oh it's four one it could
happen 41 correct oh that changes my
think Charter made the board of
Selectmen and our local Board of
Education have greater minor minority
representation we did that by Charter oh
so it is 32 by Charter by our Charter
correct by our Charter okay all
right all right well Bob I think we need
to move forward here yeah we're we're at
a gating point so if we have a a a
chairperson type first selectman then
the four and four makes sense if if it's
separately elected then it doesn't make
sense um I think what you can do for us
Jody is if you can formalize the
language you know so that we at least
know what we're dealing with when we
move forward because if we do go with a
chairperson versus a first selectman
then we would need the the additional
Forin for language to go with it yeah
it's it's changing one word three to
four yeah it's that simple
okay there's no other implications
modifications that that's great okay
then I'll continue to do what I'm doing
and your job is pretty much done on that
item we've talked this out all right um
the next item Town meetings adjustments
merge the board of Finance B budget
public hearing and town meeting board of
Finance can adjust Budget on the Fly uh
was that subsumed in yes what we talked
for 45 minutes yes it was for 45 minutes
yes unless you want to talk about it for
another 45 Bob no I'm good I don't want
to talk anymore about I'm getting
hungry yeah very very hungry I ate
before okay so we do have an item 10
here now that we added which is the
supplemental appropriation amount which
would trigger a referendum vote and
that's Adrian's
yeah so with that next week yes okay
okay so that's everything that we
had designated from last week um let me
just go through it real quickly just to
make sure that we're all on the same
page um the dollar amounts to trigger
Town meetings we approved the changes
the early voting and dates of Elections
we approved the changes
um and we have continued to next week to
have formalized and uh to integrate our
discussions into the recommendations the
referendum voting aligning the Board of
Ed etc etc the town clerk position uh
ordinance
procedures and uh the first selectman
versus elected versus
chairperson yeah and um just for the and
so sending everything to Kate morisy yes
but also if you could include me on Bob
in particular your what you redlined
because I think I need to put some of
that in the minutes and then Karen your
language that that when it goes to Kate
make sure it comes to me because I'll
add it to the minutes too all right I'll
send it to everybody including Kate
thank
you okay one other thing I wanted to
mention so the the descriptions that we
have here of these these items uh we
need we need to have this working item
list to be fleshed out into I'm guessing
three or four sentences for each item um
what we have now is a little too brief
and can't be read I don't think could be
readily understood by anybody who isn't
you know intimately involved in in the
process and the goal with what I'm
saying fleshing this out into into
something readable is I'm envisioning
that we submit this list to the town
attorney to be crafted into the specific
language you know that would that would
go on a ballot at some point or at least
the specific language whenever we talk
about this thing rather than this this
kind of Shand that we
have so some of these things I can do
others I don't know that I
understand all of them well enough I
think I'm G to get together with you
Carol I think between the two of us we
can formalize that and into something
that that reads a little bit
better and uh one bookkeeping element we
haven't approved any of the uh the
minutes yet um Carol you've kind of sent
out minutes and jod has sent out minutes
and um I think some of Jody's stuff
needs to be included in Carol's stuff
and so I think one of the things to put
on next week's agenda is to um you know
offline let's let's get everything put
together so that it's as comprehensive
and readable as we can and then we can
add that as a as an agenda item that we
uh modify and approve for the record and
I'll make a motion to approve all those
minutes okay I'll second that any
further
discussion all in
favor B sorry about this I don't think
you can do that because it's not on your
agenda
sorry you don't think we can do what
approv not your agenda have a special
meeting agendas in approv minutes we
have to put that on our agenda for next
week and that's probably better to do
because then Jody and I can fix well I
jumped in on Jody's minutes so we can
fix the minutes so they're correct and
then next week we'll just have that on
the agenda I miss understood what Karen
was moving there I'm
sorry yes next week added to the agenda
yeah
yeah no I Karen I thought you were you
were volunteering to review the minutes
that that's what I heard
so I didn't say that
well think I heard that too did anyone
else hear that could you be just a
little more expressive Karen
yeah yeah Karen we just just for the
sake we have to have the minutes in
front of us in order to you know in
order to approve them
so okay
okay anybody want to I make a motion to
adjourn I second public comment oh right
sorry it's on the agenda Ah that's on
the agenda
sorry moving on to public comment
Shannon do you have something to
contribute always Bob um thank you I'm
sorry I'll make it really brief um if
you want to look at the stuff about bif
ated referendum it's 803 c and d and
what I read in that is well anyway we'll
just go on with it um my four sense
because of inflation is that I think
that the town clerk should be elected
instead of
appointed um and just to affirm that I
think if the town clerk is doing a good
job as Carol has done for 26 years um
that person is going to get
reelected um I don't know how a
disconnected person or somebody who's
not well known in the community or
hasn't done the job for a long time
would in fact get elected and I don't
think it should be left up to even a
committee um much less one Department I
think it should be up to the
electorate um with regard to your
ordinance um I really like that the uh
what I think should happen is the board
of Selectmen should put forward the
language for an ordinance there should
be um a period of review not 120 days
but a period of review for consideration
by the town um because then if you've
got that consideration you could avoid
um a petition town meeting um in other
words if the electorate likes it you
then just go forward with our the
referendum that was proposed or whatnot
but if it doesn't like it maybe the
board of selectman reconsiders because
they' put it out for consideration uh
for review by the town and you could
avoid all this voting that that that was
discussed and you talk about 2% that's
yeah about 45 people from what I could
gather section 305 talks about the
number of registered voters as
electors and final thing just sorry I'm
looking at my notes um I don't think
that what you're talking about just as
far as the language of section 305 is
concerned if there's a petitioning town
meeting to address anything um I don't
you guys were talking about an ordinance
excuse me a referendum with regard to
your consideration of the ordinance and
I don't think there's a referendum vote
at least now as it stands and Carol
correct me if I'm wrong but I think it's
you got a petitioning town meeting and
then it's determined by the town meeting
not at a referendum vote
thanks thank you
Shannon Leanne do you have any anything
to
contribute no no thank
you thank you
Eric nothing at this
time all right if we are done with
public
speak do we have a motion to adjourn
motion to
adjourn not in all in favor
hi thank you all for your assistance who
was the second I didn't get it Adrian
thank
you thank you one and all